and welcome back to a fresh episode of
the business growth show i'm your host
sam dunning co-owner over at
webchoiceuk.com and if you haven't done
so yet check out my weekly email where
i'm sharing actionable website and
marketing tips useful podcasts bonus
goodies and much much more every week so
you can kick off your monday with a bang
give it a try over at business growth
dot email
[Music]
my guest today is sales legend returning
guest he was actually one of the very
first about two years years ago when we
just started the show we've got jeb
blunt jeb is the ceo ever sells gravy
his author
13 books including fanatical prospecting
sells eq
inc and it's very new book coming out
soon selling the price increase jeb
welcome to the show sir how you doing
well well thank you so much and i
appreciate you calling me a legend
that's uh i mean i might not be able to
make it out of the studio door after
after that kind of an introduction and
uh and yeah i'm excited about my 14th
book selling the price increase that's
coming out soon thank you for having me
on we'll we can talk a little bit about
that but uh but but more than anything
uh congratulations on the success of
this podcast you're right i was on here
at the very beginning you called me up
um gave me twenty five thousand dollars
to get on with you and uh and now i'm
coming back for free because you've uh
you've blown up and
now you're a big shot the secret's blown
out the water man but um
looking forward to looking forward to it
and uh like you say not many people get
the title legend when they come on this
show so you're in a you're in a
privileged members club there sir
so with that said joe we're going to be
chatting all about how everyone tuning
in our audience can sell a price
increase
so without being around the bush is it
is it okay is it a good thing to do to
really raise our rates raise our pricing
uh as as a tool for our business
absolutely
let me explain why
so price increases are integral to the
health of a business so whether it's a
small business a large business
optimizing and getting your pricing
right matters because an increase in
pricing is a direct drop through to your
bottom line so pricing and profits are
directly correlated
along with that is when you expand your
pricing or increase your pricing you
also can expand your revenue so you can
grow your revenue base but more
importantly you grow the bottom line and
the bottom line impact is significant
according to harvard business review a
really
solid study that they did and some work
they did on the math of a price increase
that if you increase your sales by one
percent so you add one percent in new
sales growth
typically that's going to drop through
about three percent to the bottom line
so what three percent increase on the
bottom line for one percent increase in
sales growth if you add a one percent
price increase so you increase your your
your your sales by price increase that's
going to drop through 11
that's a 400
higher return on investment from the
time that you that you invest in getting
the price increase
now the caveat here sam is that
you have to get the price increase
without losing your customer or losing
the orders so it's going to be about the
math yeah and the math only matters if
yeah if it's all if you if you get the
price increase and keep your customer
yeah yeah i mean that that sounds great
love love the sound of raising pot
online raising revenue raising profits
win win win but
are we not going to piss off our
existing customers when we say well look
your monthly spend your annual spend is
going up by x don't they all run for the
hills
well the truth is you're you're not
going to make people happy because they
don't want to buy a price increase trust
me and you don't want to sell it either
because it's typically an uncomfortable
conversation now that doesn't mean that
there aren't some price increases that
are relatively easy to push through so
and like i say a non-negotiable
broad-based price increase where you're
going out to your entire customer base
and you're adding uh you know say two
percent or three percent to uh to
whatever you're charging them people
will generally accept that without
defecting so they're going to use that
and even if you lost a couple of
customers you're typically lose your
smaller customers who aren't as invested
and overall even though you have a
little bit of attrition
you're going to get the higher return on
the top line and you're going to get the
drop through the bottom line and that's
one of the three drivers so three
motivations of price increases is the
size the relevant size of the price
increase if it's relatively small it's a
lot easier for people to accept uh but
and but that's a broad-based price
increase but imagine that for example
you sold a new customer and a lot of
small businesses and medium-sized
businesses will go out and you get a new
customer and you discount to get the
customer i know when i first started my
business in a lot of cases i brought on
customers because i needed to grow i'm
sure you did the same thing and when i
went in i went into at a price that was
too low and then one day realized that
i'm not making the profit that i need to
make on this account so in order to
right-size the pricing or optimize the
pricing on the account i had to go out
to that individual customer now that's
where it gets a little scary because
this customer is already doing business
with me there's already volume
and should i piss them off and lose them
i'm going to lose all that volume in
some cases that was a risk i was willing
to take because since i wasn't making
very much money or any money at all it
really didn't make a difference if i was
getting the top line number if it's not
dropping through the bottom line it
doesn't really matter
but in some cases what i had to do is
start thinking about my approach and
that's really what the new book is about
it's about a system for selling a price
increase that helps you get comfortable
with a very uncomfortable conversation
it just is i've been doing this for 30
years and never have i had a you know a
conversation about price increases where
it feels good
you don't want to sell it they don't
want to buy it but how do we get them to
step into a price increase in the right
way
so that we don't lose the customer or
lose the orders and there is a right way
because businesses do this every single
day and they get price increases without
losing their customers yeah and you've
got a five-step process i believe jeb on
how to sell the price increase which i
want to get into shortly
before we do what's more what's more
uncomfortable making a cold call or
raising your rates to customers oh
there's it's it's absolutely raising
your rates to customers i mean if you if
you think about like the the two things
that sales people hate the most cool
calls and uh and price increases well
price increases sit at the pantheon the
top of the pantheon of all the things
that sales people hate i mean it's worse
than cold calls worse than a crm
putting things into crm worse than doing
administrative work worse than anything
they hate going out and approaching
customers with price increases because
they're afraid of it and the reason
they're afraid of it is pure human price
increases create conflict price
increases create objections
just from my own experience and this
just goes back to the mid 90s uh i
remember the very first time that as a
sales professional that i had to go out
and get price increases my sales manager
came into a room full of us uh the sales
team we were all sitting around a
conference room table he handed each of
us a stack of green bars these are
old-time you know computer paper that
were printed out on dot matrix uh
printers and said here's all your
accounts i need a net six percent price
increase off these accounts i need it by
the end of the month and you need to
tell me by the end of the week where
you're going to get it from
and by the end of the week i didn't have
anything but excuses and i said there's
no way i'm going to lose all my
customers and he said sorry no excuses i
need 6 go figure it out and i had to go
i had to go figure it out it was
incredibly uncomfortable so
uncomfortable that i almost quit my job
over it i i know right i felt like
as a sales professional and it's a
little bit different as a business you
know as a business owner for example if
you're a business owner
there's a little bit of a different
feeling and that's the fear that i'm
going to lose the volume like i'm going
to lose the revenue coming in and lose
the customer and that means i got to go
out and get new customers that can be
difficult i mean that's what exactly
what you help people do sam but but that
there is fear in losing a customer as a
sales professional i go out and build
relationships with people i'm really
good at discounting i'm great at going
in like negotiating a deal giving away a
few points to get the deal but it felt
to me like as a sales professional that
i was doing something to my customer
right versus doing something for my
company and and that's why like when you
ask me about is it appropriate to a
price increase i i want to start with
why do price increases matter because if
you don't understand the connection to
the health of your company that includes
your job and everybody else's job that
that includes all the resources that you
need to sell that includes your benefits
all those things if you don't have
profit none of that matters you're not
going to get any of that so but i didn't
understand that i just thought it was
something that it was evil that i was
doing my customers plus human beings
naturally don't like conflict i mean we
are in our dna we are hardwired to run
away from rejection so when you approach
someone with a price increase of course
customers are going to push back nobody
wants a price increase i mean there's
not a customer in the world that's ever
called a salesperson and said sam you
know what you guys are doing a great job
for me i'm so appreciative of everything
that you're doing i tell you what you
know i think it's about time for us to
pay more could you give me a price
increase never happens right yeah nobody
wants a price increase
you have to go
yeah man yeah man so
with that said i mean like you say one
of the
it's it's becomes a lot easier if you
run something yourself if you become an
entrepreneur if you're owning your own
business you appreciate these things but
like you say when you're selling for
someone else it feels a lot tougher i
feel like when i was a just a sales rep
when i was a sales professional as
opposed to running a business i didn't
quite understand it as much as now i do
when i run a business you have several
accounts you've really got to look at
your profit loss it becomes key so is
there a is there a right time you feel
is there a good time to know when you
should raise your rates from your
experience
well that's a a wonderful question so
let's just go back to the thing that you
just said about being an entrepreneur uh
even as an entrepreneur if you think
about it it can be a difficult decision
to raise someone's rate so i'd talked
about earlier when i started this
business 14 years ago i brought on some
customers and i did it at a much lower
rate than i would now but i needed
business
so
but a couple of those customers were
really really big for i had one customer
that was a fortune 100 company the
volume was massive in terms of revenue
but they were killing me they were
taking all my resources we weren't
making really any money at all
and i had to go approach them because i
was at a point where i was going to fire
them because i couldn't keep service in
them because of the the just the the
amount of
of of you know just i guess crap that
they were putting on our plate every
single day so i had to sit down and
really think about it because i as an
entrepreneur the revenue that was coming
in can can fool you against profit so i
had to look at it and i had to you know
i just had to put them into a basically
i put them into what i call a fit matrix
but they were in the upper left-hand
corner of this this four-part matrix
that says you know it says uh you know
um hard to work with i think we're
actually in the lower left-hand corner
hard to work with low profit they
weren't going to get easier to work with
but i needed to move the profit up so i
i had to get to the point where i'd hit
rock bottom with them and i was willing
to go in and say i'm i'm willing to work
with you you're hard to work with but i
need to make more money and i move them
up in the matrix into into hard to work
with high profit so as an entrepreneur
sometimes you have to come to grips with
the fact that you're gonna you're gonna
risk losing that revenue uh and that and
that can be it so for you know and from
a timing standpoint
the the time is when you're when you're
working with a customer and you're
realizing that they're sapping your your
happiness like they're taking all of
your you know of of your resources
taking out your time they're taking all
your energy and you're not getting your
return on it sometimes that tells you
the time as a sales professional
sometimes the time is we're at a
contract renewal so we're you know it's
it's a time when we need to renew the
agreement and when we sold the account
we sold it at a low price now is the
time to raise the rate and that can get
scary because when it's a contract
renewal time your competitor is likely
in there having a conversation with them
so sometimes you want to think about
doing it earlier so you can test the
water with the price increase before
you've got everything on the line at
other times like we're in a period now
where we've got
a lot of inflation a lot of supply chain
issues so and it's a broad-based problem
it's impacting economies all over the
world and these cases when you start
looking at the pressure you're getting
from your vendors so they're raising
your rates you have to as a business
start looking at it and saying we need
to pass these on to our customers
and then there are also opportunistic
opportunities now don't throw rocks at
me somebody's going to throw in eggs and
probably post nasty things about me
online but but
sometimes and i think now is one of
those times we're in an inflationary
period where there are a number of
companies raising their rates sometimes
it's a good idea to step back and and
think about this goes back to your
earlier question
if i raise my rates now would my
customers accept it more readily than at
another time so if you're in a recession
for example and you're losing customers
that probably wouldn't be the right time
to raise your rates because you might
end up losing more customers because
people might say you know what i can do
without this but in a time a period
where where there's higher inflation
within reason
people are much more likely to accept a
price increase or when there's a time of
abundance when the economy is on fire
for example
in some cases it's a good time to raise
your rates i think that as an
organization as a you as if you're an
entrepreneur or business owner executive
you've got to sit down and run the
analysis and take a look at your entire
pricing structure as a salesperson
you've got to look at your book of
accounts and think if i'm if i've got an
account and i raise the rates on this
account by say ten percent what does
that do to to the size of my book right
so my am i increasing or expanding my my
account base
or my revenue base so there's not a
there's not a single easy answer to it
but it is something you should be
thinking about all the time yeah selling
price increases not just about an
inflationary period it's about
the the entire sales cycle from selling
a deal all the way through you know
delivering it and then managing the
account long term
yeah it sounds like a bit of a balancing
act and like you say if you're a sales
professional you might just get chucked
by your manager or direct or whoever's
in charge that is coming
whereas if you're running a business
perhaps your senior or you're in the
marketing department or you're in
revenue operations you might have to do
this balancing act like you say
and the first point you mentioned jeb is
interesting because i've been there
myself where customers have taken up a
lot of my time but i've got sucked into
it so i didn't really realize and it
wasn't until colleagues said look sam
you're on this all the time and they're
not really paying us that much a month
we need to either get rid of them or
ramp up the rate seriously and then it's
like yeah you're right because i'm
spending like a couple hours a day on
this account and they're already paying
us this much and our time's worth far
more than that so it's like you say
taking a step back
and really understanding the resources
whether that's yourself your team your
colleagues whoever
and thinking is it worth it yeah and
even then you think about it as an
entrepreneur that's a great example of
sometimes you don't think about it until
you're in the middle of it even if
you're a salesperson you don't think
about all the time that you're spending
on an account
but even then when someone points it out
to you and you realize that you have to
go do something about it the last thing
you want to do is fire your customer so
but i've seen entrepreneurs fire a
customer rather than go have a
conversation about the price increase
they would they would rather say you
know what i don't do business with you
anymore then go look i'm going to need
to get a 100 price increase to continue
this on so i and i don't understand that
but it is the it is the fear and in your
case even then as you're sitting there
at night laying down your head on your
pill and you're thinking about i gotta
go talk to this customer there's
something inside of you that's going you
know
i don't know if i wanna have this
conversation because i know it's going
to be a conflict
for me i mean if the customer's really
really hard work and i think
that they've been very very difficult
throughout then i'm i've got no qualms
no issues with it but when they're a
customer i really enjoy working with
them they've been with us for years and
years perhaps since we started the
company that's when it gets a lot harder
when they've got that long-term
relationship right that's the lower left
the lower right-hand corner of the fit
matrix is easy to work with low profit
and and when you talk about timing with
that with that group of people like as a
business i want easy to work with high
profit i'm sure you want the same thing
that's what i go for that's what i work
with i'm always trying to make sure i'm
bringing companies into my organization
customers that that are in that quadrant
however i'm like you you know i've got
customers that have been around for a
long time they've been with me since the
beginning they are low profit easy to
work with
generally i don't mess with them
unless like unless something pops up or
unless i'm in a situation where i have
to move them because it's a lot easier
to focus on the ones that are driving
you crazy and you're not paying much
more money much money those are a lot
easier to have that conversation with so
i'll typically move to those folks and
then i'll work on the ones that are easy
to work with low profit a little at a
time typically for example if they start
a new project or you know or they're
they add something to the account then
i'll reprice the new
at at a higher rate and if they ask me
about it well that's higher rate than we
were paying i go yeah that i price this
for you 10 years ago things have changed
and with the new project i have to be
here and what i found is that that
particular mechanism makes it a lot
easier for people to accept the price
increase
nice okay makes sense we've teed up up
quite nicely
so what are some
apart from the ones you've just shared
jeb what are perhaps from start
to right through to objections and
negotiation what are some of the first
things we should consider when we are
going to our existing customers saying
look the rates are going up um yeah
the number one thing is and this is
let's just for sales people business
owners too but to for salespeople is do
you have a relationship with them so
there's
a couple of mistakes that salespeople
make one of the mistakes is
that for example you're a brand new um
you're a brand new salesperson or the
account's brand new to you so your
predecessor got fired and you got handed
the book of accounts and now you got to
go talk to them
one of the big mistakes that account
executives account managers in
particular make is that
they don't talk to this this this
account until it's time for the price
increase so the very first conversation
they have with them is hey i'm raising
your rates really bad mistake so you
don't want to do that the other is uh
and you think about this if a vendor
comes to you and says i want you to pay
more the first thing that you think to
yourself is what am i getting from this
so what's in it for me and the second
thing you're getting you think is what
have you done for me lately like i
where are we so so you'll start peeling
back the onion and saying is it worth
paying more so suddenly this becomes a
big deal for you so if you're an account
manager understanding that the number
one reason why you will lose the account
to a price increase is because of
neglect you weren't paying attention to
them you were taking them for granted so
if you haven't been working and taking
care of your account if you haven't
earned the price increase essentially
because you're not managing your account
then
it's a good time for you to step back
and think about what am i doing there
the third big mistake is procrastination
and i see this happening with sales
people all the time you work for a big
company the company is going to be
giving a price increase to their
customers maybe at contract time so when
the contract renews the customers got to
pay more i'm working with a client right
now that's doing that they've got all
these contracts out there but when the
contract renews
it's not negotiable the customers well
maybe a little bit negotiable but the
customer is going to pay more
so the sales people wait and wait and
wait and wait wait till the last minute
then they go to the customer and say
we're raising your rates in some cases
significantly yeah customers pissed
because
they didn't have any time to plan for it
and and business people in particular
don't like sudden change
so you you want to get in as early as
possible and talk about it so
really if you start thinking about it
number one is
uh and the number one step is setting
the stage getting people prepared for a
price increase and that can be as simple
as you know you could allude to them uh
hey you know what our prices are going
up in a lot of cases we're holding our
prices for our current customers but i'm
not sure how much longer that's going to
hold out or you know what i'll do is
i'll go man if you've seen how much it
costs to fill up the tank of your car
you know so uh so or you know you can
talk about all our competitors out there
raising their rates right now now we're
holding it so
but you start getting them ready and and
by the way when we talk about like
objections if i get if i'm if i can get
far enough ahead of the price increase
sometimes you'll get the objection i'm
not paying that sam i'm not paying the
price increase not paying anymore but
you know that they only know where else
to go so if you just give them a little
bit of time they'll work through it and
they'll accept the price increase how
much time is enough time jeb
i i think that you know somewhere
between 30 and 60 days out you should be
having you know having those
conversations about the potential for a
price increase now okay that puts a lot
of onus on the leadership team not to
spring it on the sales team either like
if the sales team wakes up one morning
and you tell them we're raising our
prices tomorrow
you can expect to have some major like
problems out in the field and you're
gonna lose some customers because the
sales people have to buy into it too
like the salespeople to sell the price
increase to their customers they have to
buy the price increase from the
leadership team first make sense right
but let me give you another another when
you ask about the time is let's say
you're an account manager and you've not
spent any time with your customer like
you don't they don't even know you well
you need to set up a pre-price increase
campaign marketing can do this by the
way leadership can do this but as a
sales professional you're ultimately
responsible so go meet with your
customer a handful of times find
something that you can solve like do
something for them give them some reason
build a little bit of a relationship and
then you can you can spring the price
increase on them and by the way if you
are an account manager and you have
existing accounts and you know if we get
real honest with ourselves and look in
the mirror we can we'll know whether
we've been actively managing the account
or not if you haven't been then dive
into it go take a look at how they're
doing are you know are you generating
roi if you're not go solve some problems
fix your service issues shore things up
so that you don't cede the moral high
ground to your customer when you
approach them with the price increase
and they say hey what have you done for
me lately all i've got is bad service
bad quality bad this bad that and you
haven't even been here you there's
there's not a lot of defense in that
situation so get your ducks in the row
and get your house in order as you begin
approaching them yeah a lot of this
sounds like preparation really jeb
it's yeah just getting ahead of the it's
getting prepared uh
we in the book itself we take you
through a
an account risk profile analysis process
we use a nine box frame to do this where
you look at things like your quality and
service uh status your relationship
status and the accounts alternatives are
doing business with you so for example
and by the way your your alternative is
doing business with the account
and understanding where you fit in that
matrix and from a preparation standpoint
also informs
the way in which you're going to
approach the account and what maybe you
need to do as a team in order to shore
things up so
obviously you've got a lot more risk
with your high you know large accounts
your big strategic
excuse me strategic accounts um but
on the flip side of that the large
accounts and the strategic accounts are
where all the money is so if you get
price increases with them it covers a
lot of a ground for you in your total
price increase campaign so you want to
prepare set the stage
and you want to make sure that you have
analyzed your larger accounts and that
you're shaping your approach around what
you you know where you are with those
particular accounts yeah so we're giving
giving our customers good notice we're
saying look 30 to 60 days time this is
what's going to happen because of xyz
because of inflation because we're
giving a better service because we're
adding features to our products whatever
in the meantime we're having regular
calls with them we're trying to add
value in the sense that
giving them a good experience really
rather than just letting their accounts
sit there because it's profitable we're
actually trying to have regular calls
saying look what can we be doing to help
you help you what's perhaps not working
quite as well what can we improve on and
making sure you're keeping in touch
regularly once let's pretend we've done
all that jeb we're doing a good job with
our customers
how can we now
kind of push it forwards and get them to
agree to i guess
well first of all when we talk about
agree we're talking about acceptance
right so acceptance is
every
what every human has to do when there's
any type of change we have to accept the
change
so
once you've once you've basically
prepared analyzed you've got to figure
out your approach and there's
essentially
two different or three different
approaches to price increases one is
that you're defending a price increase
so typically with defending a price
increase your company is is has told the
entire account base you're getting a
price increase and you've got to take
inbound calls from those customers
saying i don't want to pay it you've got
to deal with your objections deal with
their concerns
in most cases that's being driven by
marketing but in a typical you know
sales process you're gonna you're gonna
take two different types of approaches
with what we would call a negotiable
price increase so this would be a price
increase where you're going to the
customer and this would especially be
true if you're a small business person
you're going to customers saying your
prices are increasing and the customer
may push back and you might have to
negotiate so one approach is presenting
the price increase so this is more an
assumptive presentation where you're
going to tell them
the price increase what's being
increased and then you're going to give
them a because you're going to we're
going to you're going to use a price
increase because statement the prices go
are going up to this much
it's going to go up on this date because
and and and then you just assume that
they're going to say yes they may give
you some pushback they may negotiate but
you're going in with a pure assumption
with your larger accounts so big
accounts where there's a lot at risk and
the last thing anybody wants to do is
lose a big you know large strategic
account over a price increase especially
not to your competitor unless there's
some you know egregious reason why you
need to let them go in those cases we're
going to use a business case so it would
be no different for example if you're
going into that large account for the
very first time and you're presenting a
business case and you're closing the
deal
so with the price increase we're going
to go in with a business case math
we're going to go in and we're going to
talk about the value that we've
delivered for them
we're going to talk about both the
emotional value and the measure
measurable business outcomes uh we're
going to talk about the metrics that
matter we're going to talk about all the
things that we've done we're going to
we're going to give them you know
probably multiple narratives one of
those narratives might be an economic
fairness narrative hey we're being
impacted by this and
in order to continue to service you at
the level that you expect we need this
uh
or we're like you said we're adding new
features so a future value narrative um
and so we we've done you know we're
going to be doing this past value
narrative would be we have done this to
solve your problems and we're going to
build a business case and we're going to
present it to them now with large
strategic accounts we're not going to
assume that they're going to pay their
price increase we're going to ask for
permission to implement the price
increase and the reason that we do that
is
that if you put this large large
strategic account that typically has a
lot of alternatives into a corner then
they've got big procurement teams you
could trigger them to say you know what
we're going to go out and do a search
for this especially if it's a contract
renewal time so typically what i'm going
to do with them and that's why i'm going
to run a risk profile analysis first to
really understand what are their
alternatives to doing business with me
have we really earned this price
increase how integrated we are into
their workflows then i'm going to sit
down with them and i'm going to say you
know sam i would like like permission to
implement this price increase starting
in you know at the beginning of june
my out
always my escape hatch with always with
large accounts is i always can back down
i can negotiate i can work out something
but i want to come away with something
more than what i've got because
believe it or not one is is more than
zero so if i get anything right i'm in
better shape than i was going in but but
i want to approach that in a more
collaborative way with my largest
accounts
yeah like you say it might be slightly
simpler for smaller accounts or perhaps
smaller companies that don't have
procurement finance various c-suite
execs
that you're not just speaking to one
person you're speaking to a full board
there's not just one-person
decision-making process it's quite a
detailed thing so if you upset someone
you could be at risk of losing the whole
account and that could be tens of
thousands or more um
so yeah like you said it sounds like
you've got a build up to it presenting a
full case covering all those things like
you said like the value you've brought
so far get them involved emotionally
show them what you've done to present to
fix their problem show them different
forms of metrics build up the narrative
or the environment past work done future
work that you're planning and so on so
building a fully fledged case to
and then what was the what was the last
part of it you're asking for that
permission to
yeah just you know it's a collaborative
process so i'm delivering the i'm
delivering a business case and then
typically with a larger account again if
it's a larger account that has that i
have very little risk of losing because
they don't have a lot of alternatives so
understanding that in a price increase
situation the power that the account has
over you
is their alternatives to doing business
with you does that make sense
we'll add to that the moral high ground
if you have been doing a poor job of
servicing the account so if you're
delivering poor service and poor quality
if you haven't built wide and deep
relationships then in those cases
they're going to use that to bludgeon
you with they're going to go why should
i pay you more when you're doing this
for me let me give you four examples of
where you failed me
you'll you'll start backing down really
quickly when you've done that
but in in a situation where a company
has multiple alternatives let's say you
have a couple of big competitors in the
marketplace those big competitors would
love to take this account away from you
and if they see any rift in the
relationship they might do that
the thing that you have in your in your
favor in large accounts is something
called the status quo bias and that is
that that human beings don't
particularly like change and there is a
cost to change yeah so with a large
account for them to move someplace else
requires them to spend time energy money
you know they've got to go on a search
they've got to go find something else
they got to replace you they've got to
go through the issues of changing things
on the inside so i need to balance the
cost of their change against where the
alternatives are
so once i understand that if there
aren't a lot of alternatives i'm
probably just going to go in and present
the price increase sam your the price on
x widget is going up by this much
because we're in this situation and the
only way we're going to be you know be
able to
maintain quality is we've got to change
manufacturers and suppliers and this is
going to happen on june 1st that would
be presenting a price increase even
though they may come back and say i
can't pay that much i might negotiate it
but i'm just going to assume they're
going to buy it
in a large account where they let's say
i've got a couple of big competitors
that are already knocking on their door
and maybe my relationships are not quite
as deep as i'd like them to be i would
say something like you know sam
you know let's let's talk about what
we've done over the past year let's do
an account review
let's uh let's take a look at some of
the future problems that we're taking a
look at solving for you here's where we
think we're going to go
and in order for us to put the resources
on this particular problem
what we need to do is we need to
increase our rates by this much and uh
we we want to increase our rate starting
july 1st and i want to get your
permission to implement those i'm just
like that but in that situation i'm
telling them i recognize that i'm in a
weaker position
and i'm i'm appealing to you human to
human
for the opportunity to you know to to
cover my profits and i've um i've both
of those both of those uh those those
tactics work and
and but with my larger accounts what i
find almost always is that if i build a
good business case if i've earned the
price increase if i build good
relationships and i'm doing a good job
for them and i approach it like that
relax assertive confidence but a good
business case a good reasoning why and i
ask for permission they almost always
accept it now that doesn't mean that i
don't have to negotiate it there are
times when i have to negotiate things or
give things up but in in most all cases
they say yes and if they said no we
can't pay any more and if you raise our
rates we're going to move to your
competitor then i'm i'm at
a choice i have to make do i want to
keep them or do i want to lose them and
in most cases i'm not going in with that
particular
you know type of approach the you know a
collaborative approach if i want to lose
them so i always have an escape hatch
before we wrap up with the negotiation
part of this actually there's probably a
couple more points as well but you
mentioned something interesting a couple
minutes back jeb about the status quo
that's something i talk about a lot when
i do solo episodes on the show around
marketing around websites and all that
good stuff because like you say
humans are creatures of habit
we hate change
we hate the tiresome cumbersome process
of having to move a vendor or not having
to do something if we have to because we
know if we swap vendors especially if
we're talking working with complex
products or solutions it's not easy
right it takes time to move over we've
gotta get to know the account manager
we've gotta get another software perhaps
the rest of our team do it's not quick
but what happens
when
our customers call our bluff
and they say
look jeb
i'm not really happy with this i'm gonna
move we don't know if they're gonna move
or not but they're threatening us
they're saying look
if you don't if you don't keep my rates
as they are for the next six months i'm
off what happens then well that's why
you have to understand in advance what
your customers alternatives are so
so for example one of the stories that i
like to tell customers is the story of
what what it was like before we were
working together
so
i i said i just tell them the story you
know before we were working together you
had gone through four different vendors
all of these problems you were facing
you were in this situation and then we
got together and here's what we've
changed like this is called a past value
narrative but here's what changed we did
this for you this for you this for you
this week for for you and by the way two
years ago we were your vendor of the
year and
just the other day ago you had this
problem we jumped in and we solved that
problem we know you
and it was it took a long time for us to
get to that place where we know each
other at a level where
we we can we can converse like this
and and it would be very difficult to
replace this relationship i tell people
that story all the time i want them to
know that i want to put that into their
minds
uh but before i go in if i run the the
risk matrix or the you know the risk
profile analysis and this non-box is in
the book so it's selling the price
increase you can get it there i walk you
through step by step when i run that
what i'm doing is i'm understanding from
my customer standpoint what their bluff
might be so for example they say we're
going to do it in-house the customer
says that i mean i'm sure that happens
in your business we're just going to
take our marketing in-house we don't
need you anymore
but you but you know them like you know
what it takes to build this up it's not
easy and now you got to go hire a 200
000 a year cmo and then you got to get
three people around the cmo
and then you don't even really
understand how seo works you don't
understand any of those things
then then you know that taking it
in-house is going to be very difficult
for them so they may be calling your
bluff
but in that in that situation you know
that they're probably not going to go
down that road once they sit down and
think about the cost-benefit analysis go
back to why do i want to give people
time because in that situation i would
consider that an objection because
they're it's unlikely they're going to
move and do it and do it on their own so
if i give them a little bit of time and
space then i give them some time to
think about it so i might say sam i
totally get where you're coming from and
i can see from your standpoint that
these rate increases would cause you to
think that it might be less expensive to
do it on your own tell you what why
don't we do this
why don't i give you some time let's
take 60 days take a look at what your
options look like in terms of doing it
on your own and then let's come back and
talk in a few weeks to see whether or
not it makes sense for us to continue
working together
and and in that situation i'm calling
their bluff because i i've done my
research i've done my homework and i
know that the cost of them doing it on
their own is going to be way more than
their cost of hiring me makes sense or
they're not going to be able to to pull
it off because they just don't have the
resources
and and so you have to you have to think
about it that way if they say we're
going to do business with your
competitor but you know that your
product is so integrated into their
workflows unwinding that is going to be
almost impossible for them and the cost
of doing that's going to be massive and
it's going to be incredibly disruptive
then you can explain that to them
in some cases they'll pull you know
they'll call your bluff and then you
especially at a contract renewal date
and let's say that you've put in a lot
of specialty equipment or there are
leases involved you say
i totally get where you're coming from
hey let me make sure i'll get you the
cost of being able to get out of the
contract it's give me a quarter of a
million dollars i've done this a number
of times where hey the cost of getting
out of the contract is a quarter million
dollars and they go back and look at it
and they come back and say yeah i don't
think we want to change because it's
going to be too much what can we do so
now we've we've changed the conversation
if you don't know that like if you don't
understand what those alternatives are
if you don't understand what their
situation is and by the way you don't
understand what your alternatives are
like for example if you weren't spending
four hours a week working on this this
account that isn't generating any profit
you took that same four hours a week and
went out and found new accounts you
could replace them so what are your
alternatives as well if you get that and
understand it walking through the door
you're going to do a lot better job of
dealing with the issues that they throw
at you and you're going to get issues
you're going to get objections you're
going to get negotiation you're going to
get pushback you're going to get bluffs
because nobody wants a price increase so
that's why you want to do your homework
up front and understand what you're
getting into yeah i love that love the
especially love the story where you're
reflecting on kind of the initial
problem they came to you with how you
help them fix it what you've done for
them over the last x months years and
how you've integrated with their team
because that kind of refreshes their
memory and they'll probably start to
think ah right yeah you're probably
right that would be very difficult to do
that with another vendor so it's kind of
true it's amazing how how fast uh your
you know your customer gets amnesia in
the face of a pricing yes
yeah
i can imagine i can imagine but i'd
probably be the same if i was on the
other end um
with that said
if someone is pushing hard for let's say
is
because like you say if it's a if it's a
smaller account and perhaps they're
quite difficult or hard to work with
you might not be as concerned if it was
a larger scale account that you're you
really want to keep on board if they are
really pushing they're saying look look
jeb meet me halfway let's let's go 50 of
what you're proposing do we just give in
do we say yep no worries getting the
contract over now or what what's the
best way to play it out
that is the best question of the day so
if we think about let's let's talk about
objection versus negotiation so an
objection is i'm not paying this price
increase that's an objection they
haven't accepted it yet negotiation is
they've accepted it i mean i'm i'll i'll
i'll pay you something more i agree
you've you've earned it but i'm not
paying you that much that's a
negotiation so the number one thing you
want to think about when you're
negotiating a price increase is protect
the points if you're listening or
watching write this down protect the
points
because if they say i'll meet you
halfway and you just give away 50 of
your price increase go back to the
conversation we're having earlier about
the amount of drop through you get to
the profit line per point of price
increase so giving away slashing half of
it and just walking out the door that is
giving away a lot of future profits all
you gotta do is just add that up over
say a five year contract and it can get
you know it can be shocking how much
money it is so number one thing is
protect the points so
when you have are have a negotiable
price increase in other words i'm going
there but i have room to negotiate you
first of all you want to start with your
with what you're going in with what am i
presenting what am i targeting so i'm
usually going to present more than i'm
targeting right so let's say i'm i'm
targeting six percent i go in with 10.
and then what's my you know what's my
bottom line so what is my limit so where
i call the limit zone but what's where's
the limit so i need to understand that
first so i understand where i'm what i'm
giving away number two is don't give
away whole points so if you're gonna
give away any type of points give them
away in tenths of a point or a quarter
of a point or a half of a point so that
you're negotiating in smaller increments
versus yeah i'll give you five points
off that's just massive
but finally what i like to do is create
an inventory of funny money the funny
money are the things that you can do for
this customer that don't cost you money
that don't don't cost you price increase
points like for example let's say for
you in your business uh sam um you've
got at you know at uh at webchoice
you've got a series of training videos
on uh on what business owners need to
know about seo
and you built these these training
videos you have them behind a firewall
you charge 99 for the course
so you're going out for a price increase
the person says hey you know meet me
halfway and you said
i really can't do it on the price
increase but i could give you free
access for you and your employees to
this training program
or
um we could you know we could um we
could we could put you in our on our uh
premier customer account where you get
24 hour access to our service team or um
you know we're going to give you this so
what i want to think about is all the
funny money that i have at my disposal
things that i can do for them right but
don't but don't cost me points make
sense like concessions right yeah things
that aren't going to cost you money but
might just be these are things that
we've already got that don't cost us as
business time or effort we can just hand
them off to them and they'll probably
find them valuable exactly so you're
giving them value so they get to save
face like when they're negotiating for
you you know what do they want they want
to feel like i didn't want to pay the
price increase but i got something for
it so you're helping them save face and
you know it's sometimes funny money you
know has a cost to it but the cost is
much lower than giving away a point of
revenue that makes sense right so uh so
i i want to look at it that way but i
want to make sure i have all those
things and i've thought about it like
these things might be good for this
customer in some cases i'll go in with
those things i'll say
this would be future value right we're
raising the prices but you're getting
boom boom boom boom boom so i help them
save face in advance typically on and i
do that with with customers where i have
a really really good relationship it's
strong
it's transparent uh we work with each
other all the time then i'm able to say
hey i've got to raise my rates however
because you're such a good customer i'm
going to give you all of these things
this is worth this much to you
let's move forward and and that'll
typically
get us around the negotiation itself
i like the funny money points um sounds
a little bit like the old batna what was
it best alternative to something
agreement yeah
well but if you think about batten or
what is baton and batman's about
alternatives right so
it's it's
the person with the the greatest number
of alternatives has the most power when
negotiating so when your customer has
more alternatives to doing business with
you
they have more power but when you have
alternatives or you have different ways
to to
shape those alternatives then it it
equalizes the power at the negotiation
table
okay so
let's say we've we've given some funny
monies we've thought about the resources
that we've got that aren't going to
necessarily cost us much or perhaps they
cost us a little bit of our time we've
sweetened them up a little bit
but the prospect is still saying that's
good jeb i'm happy to go down to 40 of
what you're what you're proposing now
what do we do they're still they're
still trying to grill us a bit more
well i think in those cases like if
you've if you've if you've done
your you know your work on negotiating
so you've
essentially what you want to do is
you're going to go make your case again
so someone says 40 again i'm coming back
i'm going to make the case again i'm
going to get my calculator out i'm going
to add things up for them i'm going to
show them why they need to pay the price
increase i'm going to do those things
but if we're at the end and they say
look here's where i am then i have a
choice to make as a business i'm either
a sales professional i'm either going to
say
well i can't do 40 but i can do 20 or
i'm gonna say okay or i'm gonna say look
here's the deal like if we can't come to
an agreement on this i can't do business
with you anymore and that would probably
be determined based on you know how much
profit i was making for the account how
many alternatives they had i mean it's
negotiation there's nothing that's gonna
be perfect about it uh but i think what
you'll find is that in in many cases
that you're gonna be
um you're gonna find that funny money
future value those things work very very
well and if it's a really really big
account that has alternatives and they
immediately say to you hey look i'm
willing to work with you but not this
much
then um then you've already won because
they're telling you
we value you enough not to go throw your
competitor in your face so let's work
out a deal and i just think you've got
to use your good your good senses but my
i go back to what i said earlier your
number one job and a price increase
negotiation is to protect the price
increase points protect the points
that's what matters the most and and you
want to get the highest number of points
you can the customer wants to get the
lowest number of points they can and i'm
not a big fan of meeting in the middle
and i certainly don't believe in win-win
because it's your job to win for your
team and win for your profits so but
there's but there's gonna be compromise
uh i just wouldn't go and they say oh
yeah we'll do 50 50. just meet us
halfway and you go okay
what did you give away in doing that the
fact that they even agreed to do that
without throwing your competitor in
phase means that they value you
live up to that but you have to be able
to build your case you've got to be able
to do the math for them and show them
the value that you're delivering and by
the way sam just for the audience the
way that i present value is when i'm
working with a
customer is um i take their personal
outcome so what's in it for them working
with me emotional outcomes the the the
way that it makes them feel the peace of
mind that it gives them working with me
the way i help them you know
achieve particular goals save time that
type of thing and what are the
measurable business outcomes that's
that's the math
minus the price equals value
so if i take those the personal outcomes
emotional outcomes measurable business
outcomes and then i take the the price
and and you know minus the price and i'm
able to to make the case that they're
getting a much higher value for the
price that they're paying
then and from a negotiating standpoint
i'm in a much better situation i i'm i'm
making my case so when you're in a
situation where you are you know the
person says hey you know i don't want to
pay this much you've got to be able to
go back and make your case again
yeah yeah i like that and a lot of this
sounds like like you said before really
just preparing properly so really
understand you said protecting your
points but also like you mentioned
earlier knowing
that there probably is going to be
pushback with some customers and knowing
kind of what your limits are what you
need really to keep your business
profitable to to grow accounts and
then like you say having concessions
ready having having funny money ready so
just just being well prepared and making
sure beforehand like you said you've
looked after the account probably you
service them well you've been a good um
sales person or business owner or
whatever your position is in your
company and you've looked after them so
you've you've got those things to fall
back on and when you explain things in a
clear fashion getting in the personal
emotional and business metrics involved
they it's going to be hard for them to
shift
unless they are a terrible client and
you don't really want to work with them
anyway you're happy to walk away because
at some stage you might have to yes
exactly i think you nailed it
good man um i think we've covered this
pretty nicely is there any any final
points that we need to consider jeb
before we wrap this one up i i think
that the the last thing i would say to
your audience is
that
approaching price increases is really
about your your overall message and uh
we in the book we i'll give you eight
narratives eight different ways to
approach price increases but when we
start thinking about message it's not
just
what you say it's how you say it
and we know that price increases make us
feel nervous we know that it feels like
conflict and rejection two things that
human beings want to avoid avoid in fact
in a lot of cases when we think about
the two things human beings fear the
most is death and rejection and in most
cases we fear rejection more than we
fear death so it has a tendency when
we're approaching a price increase to
reshape the way that we approach the
customer in terms of how we're saying
things so you want to pay particular
attention to your confidence there's
nothing that sells a price increase
better than relaxed assertive confidence
and that includes both your body
language it includes um the way that you
say things so the way the words come out
of your mouth and uh the way you present
things and uh and the in the shape of
the words like the words that you use
are you using confident words or
insecure words and i would i would sit
back and and think about that
in terms of what price increased
conversations are going well for you
which ones are not going well for you
and then think about how you're saying
things if you do that it's a lot easier
than to step into what you're gonna say
because if you say something that's
brilliant but you say it in an insecure
way a good customer is gonna bulldoze
right over you and you're gonna walk
away and go i'll take whatever i can get
or i'll take nothing at all
yeah like a lot of things it sounds like
delivery is key
and how you how you bring it up how you
communicate to your customers because if
you're saying it and the customer can
sound you're really nervous and they can
sound like you're not really too sure
yourself they're probably gonna walk all
over you right that's correct
good man sales legend jeb blunt thank
you for returning on the show sir please
do share with us tell everyone about how
they can get their hands on the book
when it's out and anything else you'd
like to send our audience to and
go ahead my friend absolutely well the
name of the book is selling the price
increase and and sam i'm i'm really
excited about this book because
in the history of business books this is
the only business book that has ever
been written
specifically on selling b2b price
increases so uh it's it's a it's a
comprehensive
guide to
getting the prices that you deserve from
your existing customers so
you can get it on amazon barnes and
noble
if you're listening from different
places in the world
and the it'll be available in the us
first but you can go ahead and place
your pre-orders so go get the book and
then uh and if you want to connect with
me i'm on linkedin i'm twitter at
salesgravy um uh instagram it sells
gravy um facebook it sells gravy uh i'm
it sells gravy i think i'm even on
snapchat it sells gravy but wherever you
are um connect with me and uh and come
to salesgrippy.com if you want to find
out more about the book
awesome man and we'll put all of those
links over on the show notes at
businessgrowth.marketing and with that
jeb want to thank you very much for for
coming on really enjoyed it
thank you sir appreciate it truly
grateful
no worries man and as always if you
enjoyed today's episode a quick rating
or review on your podcast channel is
very much appreciated and with that we
should catch you on the next one
appreciate you tuning in